# Decorator design pattern

**Decorator** or Wrapper is a *structural* design pattern that lets you attach new behaviors to the objects by replacing these objects inside special wrapper objects that contains the behaviors. Giving additional responsibilities to an object either statically or dynamically.

### Why?
* Extending a class is the first thing that comes to mind when you need to alter an object's behavior.
* However interitance has several caveats that you need to be aware of:
    * Inheritance is static. We can't alter the behavior of an existing object at runtime. We can only replace the whole object with another one that's created from a different subclass.
    * Subclasses can have just one parent class. In most languages, inheritance doesn't let a class inherit behaviors of multiple classes at the same time.
* One of the ways to overcome these caveats is by using **Composition** instead of **Inheritance**. With composition one object `has a` reference to another and delegates it some work, where as with inheritance, the object itself is able to do that work, inheriting the behavior from its superclass.
* With composition, you can easiy substitute the linked helper object with another, chaning the behavior of various classes, having references to multiple objects and delegating them all kinds of work.

### Structure
* **Component** declares the common interface for both wrappers and wrapped objects.
* **Concrete Component** is a class of objects being wrapped. It defines the basic behavior, which can be altered by decorators.
* **Base Decorator** class has fields for referencing a wrapped object. THe field's type should be declared as the component interface so it can contain both concrete components and decorators. The base decorator delegates all operations to the wrapped object.
* **Concrete Decorator** define extra behaviors that can be added to components dynamically. Concrete decorators override methods of base decorator and execute their behavior either before or after calling the parent method.

`Note`: Decorator/Wrapper implements the same interface as the wrapped object. That's why from the client's perspective these objects are identical. Make the wrapper's reference field accept any object that follows that interface. This will let you cover an object in multiple wrappers, adding the combined behavior of all the wrappers to it.

### Use
* Use when need to be able to assign extra behaviors to objects at runtime without breaking the code that uses these objects.
* Use when it is not possible to extend an object's behavior using inheritance.

`Note`: Behavior of decorator depends on the decorators stack.

### Code 

<details><summary>Decorator Pattern</summary>

`ChristmasTree.java`
```java
public interface ChristmasTree {
    String decorate();
}
```

`ChristmasTreeImpl.java`
```java
public class ChristmasTreeImpl implements ChristmasTree {
    @Override
    public String decorate() {
        return "Christmas Tree";
    }
}
```

`TreeDecorator.java`
```java
public abstract class TreeDecorator implements ChristmasTree {
    private ChristmasTree tree;
    public TreeDecorator(ChristmasTree tree) {
        this.tree = tree;
    }
    @Override
    public String decorate() {
        return tree.decorate();
    }
}
```

`BubbleLights.java`
```java
public class BubbleLights extends TreeDecorator {
    public BubbleLights(ChristmasTree tree) {
        super(tree);
    }
    public String decorate() {
        return super.decorate() + decorateWithBubbleLight();
    }
    private String decorateWithBubbleLight() {
        return " with Bubble Lights";
    }
}
```

`Garland.java`
```java 
public class Garland extends TreeDecorator {
    public Garland(ChristmasTree tree) {
        super(tree);
    }
    public String decorate() {
        return super.decorate() + decorateWithGarland();
    }
    private String decorateWithGarland() {
        return " with Garland";
    }
}
```

`ClientCode.java`
```java
ChristmasTree tree = new Garland(new ChristmasTreeImpl());
System.out.println(tree.decorate());

ChristmasTree tree2 = new BubbleLights(new Garland(new Garland(new ChristmasTreeImpl())));
System.out.println(tree2.decorate());
```

`Output`
```
Christmas Tree with Garland
Christmas Tree with Garland with Garland with Bubble Lights
```

</details>

### Credits
- [Refactoring.Guru](https://refactoring.guru/)
- [Baeldung](https://www.baeldung.com/java-decorator-pattern)

