# Builder design pattern

**Builder** is a *creational design* pattern that lets you construct complex objects step by step. The pattern allows you to produce different types and representation of an object using the same construction code.

`Note`- Using builder pattern make sense only when your products are quite complex and requires extensive configuration.

### Pattern 

* Why we need a builder pattern?

As we can have a constructor with a lots of parameters and most of which might remain unused making the constructur calls pretty ugly.

* What does this pattern suggests?

Builder pattern suggests that extract the object construction code out of its own class and move it to separate objects called builders. This builder lets you construct complex objects step by step and it doesn't allow other objects to access the product while being built. Important part is that you can call only those steps that are necessary for producing a particular configuration of an object.

### Director
We can further extract a series of calls to the builder steps we use to construct a product into a separate class called **director**. 
* The director class defines the order in which to execute the building steps, while the builder provides the implementation for those steps.
* The director knows which building steps to execute to get a working product.

### Code

<details><summary>Builder Pattern</summary>

<script src="https://gist.github.com/nisrulz/11c0d63428b108f10c83.js"></script>

</details>