# Singleton design pattern

**Singleton** is a *creational design* pattern that lets you ensure that a class has only one instance, while providing a global access point to the instance.

`Use`: There are many objects we only need one of: thread pools, caches, dialog boxes, object used for logging, graphic driver objects and many other resource intensive objects.

Singleton pattern provides solution to two problems.
1. Ensure that a class has just a single instance. (Clients may not even realize that they're working with the same object all the time)
2. Provide global access point to that instance.

### Pattern
- Singleton pattern disables all other means of creating objects except for the special creation method.
- This method either creates a new object or returns an existing ont if it has already been created.
- We use a static method, in other words a class method.
- Constructor is private for Singleton class.

### Code

<details><summary>Singleton Pattern</summary>

```java
public class Singleton {
    private static Singleton uniqueInstance;

    private Singleton() {}

    public static Singleton getInstance() {
        if (uniqueInstance == null) {
            uniqueInstance = new Singleton();
        }
        return uniqueInstance;
    }
}
```
</details>

`Extra`:
- `synchronized` keyword to *getInstance(), we force every thread to wait its turn before it can enter the method. i.e. no two threads can enter the method at same time. But Synchronizing method can decrease performance by a factor of 100. 
```java
public static synchronized Singleton getInstance() {...}
```
- You can create the instance of Singleton in a static initializer. The code is guranteed to be thread safe.
```java
private static Singleton uniqueInstance = new Singleton();
```
- `double-checking locking` to reduce the use of synchronizaion in getInstance(). [volatile](https://www.javatpoint.com/volatile-keyword-in-java) keyword ensures that multiple threads handle the uniqueInstance variable correctly when it is being initialized to the Singleton Instance.
- The volatile prevents memory writes from being re-ordered, making it impossible for other threads to read uninitialized fields of your singleton through the singleton's pointer.

<details><summary>Thread safe Singleton Pattern</summary>

```java
public class Singleton {
    private volatile static Singleton uniqueInstance;

    private Singleton() {}

    public static Singleton getInstance() {
        if (uniqueInstance == null) {
            synchronized (Sinlgleton.class) {
                if (uniqueInstance == null) {
                    uniqueInstance = new Singleton();
                }
            }
        }
        return uniqueInstance;
    }
}
```
</details>

- enum fields are compile time constants and thread sage, but they are instances of their enum type. And, they're constructed when the enum type is referenced for the first time. [For More](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/26285520/implementing-singleton-with-an-enum-in-java).

<details><summary>Enum Singleton Pattern</summary>

```java 
public enum Singleton {
    UNIQUE_INSTANCE;   
}
public class SingletonClient {
    Singleton singleton = Singeton.UNIQUE_INSTANCE;
}
```
</details>

`Note`- This pattern requires special treatment in a multithreaded environment so that multiple threads won't create a singleton object several times.

It may be difficult to unit test the client code of the Singleton because many framework rely on the inheritance when producing mock objects and since the `constructor of singleton is private` and `overriding static methods is impossible` in most languages, so there is a need of creative way to mock the singleton. 

### Credit
- [Refactoring.Guru](https://refactoring.guru/)
- [Head first deisgn Patterns](https://www.amazon.in/First-Design-Patterns-Brain-Friendly/dp/0596007124)
- [Java Point](https://www.javatpoint.com/volatile-keyword-in-java)