# Mediator design pattern

**Mediator** is a *behavioral* design pattern that lets you reduce chaotic dependencies between objects. This pattern restricts direct communication beterrn the objects and forces them to collaborate only via a mediator object.

### Why?
Elements can have lots of relations with other elements. Hence, changes to some elements may affect the others. And by having this logic implemented directly inside the code of elements you make these elements classes much harder to reuse in other location of the apps.

### What?
* The mediator pattern suggests that you should cease all the direct communication between the components which you want to make independent of each other.
* Instead, these components must collaborate indirectly, by calling a special mediator object that redirects the calls to appropriate components.
* As a result, components depends only on a single mediator class instead of being coupled to dozens of their colleagues.
* The mediator pattern lets you encapsulate a complex web of relations between various objects inside a single mediator object. The fewer dependencies a class has, easier it becomes to modify, extend or reuse that class.

### Structure
* **Components** are various classes that contain some business logic. Each component has a reference to a mediator, declared with the type of the mediator interface. The component isn't aware of the actual class of the mediator, so you can reuse the component in the other programs by linking by linking it to a different mediator.
* **Mediator** interface declares methods of communication with components, which usually include just a single notification method. Components may pass any context as arguements of this method, including their own objects, but only in such a way that no coupling occurs between a recieving component and the sender's class.
* **Concrete Mediator** encapsulate relations between various components. Concrete Mediators often keep references to all the components they manage and sometimes even manage their lifecycle.
* Components must not be aware of other components. If something important happens within or to a Component, it must only notify the mediator. When the mediator receives the notification, it can easily identify the sender, which might be just enough to decide what component should be triggered in return.
* From a component's persective, it all looks like a total black box. The sender doesn't know who'll end up handling its request, and reciever doesn't know who sent the request in the first place.


### Code

<details><summary>Mediator Pattern</summary>

`ChatMediator.java`
```java
public interface ChatMediator {
    void sendMessage(String msg, User user);
    void addUser(User user);
}
```

`ChatMediatorImpl.java`
```java
// Acts as a Concrete Mediator.
public class ChatMediatorImpl implements ChatMediator {
    private List<User> users;
    
    public ChatMediatorImpl() {
        this.users = new ArrayList<>();
    }

    @Override
    public void addUser(User user) {
        this.users.add(user);
    }

    @Override
    public void sendMessage(String msg, User user) {
        for (User u : this.users) {
            if (u != user) {
                u.receive(msg);
            }
        }
    }
}
```

`User.java`
```java
public abstract class User {
    ChatMediator mediator;
    String name;

    public User(ChatMediator mediator, String name) {
        this.mediator = mediator; 
        this.name = name;
    }

    public abstract void send(String msg);
    public abstract void receive(String msg);
}
```

`UserImpl.java`
```java
public class UserImpl extends User {

    public UserImpl(ChatMediator mediator, String user) {
        super(mediator, user);
    }

    @Override
    public void send(String msg) {
        System.out.println(this.name + ": sending Message = " + msg);
        mediator.sendMessage(msg, this);
    }

    @Override
    public void receive(String msg) {
        System.out.println(this.name + ": receive Message = " + msg);
    }
}
```

`ClientCode.java`
```java
ChatMediator mediator = new ChatMediatorImpl();
User user1 = new UserImpl(mediator, "Dashan");
User user2 = new UserImpl(mediator, "Rosa");
User user3 = new UserImpl(mediator, "Bharat");
User user4 = new UserImpl(mediator, "Vichitr");

mediator.addUser(user1);
mediator.addUser(user2);
mediator.addUser(user3);
mediator.addUser(user4);

user1.send("Hi All!!!");
```

`Output`
```
Dashan: sending Message = Hi All!!!
Rosa: receive Message = Hi All!!!
Bharat: receive Message = Hi All!!!
Vichitr: receive Message = Hi All!!!
```

</details>

`Note`: Mediator can evolve into God object.

### Credits
- [Refactoring.Guru](https://refactoring.guru/)
- [Journal Dev](https://www.journaldev.com/1730/mediator-design-pattern-java)

