# Memento design pattern

**Memento** is a *behavioral* design pattern that lets you save and restore the previous state of an object without revealing the details of its implementation.

### Use 
Before executing an operation, the app saves a snapshot of the objects state, which can later be used to restore objects to previous state.

### Why?
Let's thing about state snapshots. To have/produce one we probably need to go over all the fields in an object and copy their values into storage. However this would work only if the object had quite relaxed access restriction s to its contents. Unfortunately, most real objects won't let other peek inside them that easily, hiding all significant data in private fields.

### Pattern
* The memento pattern delegates creating the state snapshots to the actual owner of that state, the **orginator** object. 
* Hence, instead of other objects trying to copy the editor's state from the outside, the editor class itself can make the snapshot since it has full acess to its own state.
* The pattern suggests storing the copy of the object's state in a special object called **memento**.
* The contexts of the memento aren't accessible to any other object except the one that produced it. Other object's must communicate with mementos using limited interface which may allow fetching the snapshot's metadata but not the original object's state contained in the snapshot.
* Such restrictive policy lets us store mementos inside other objects, usually called **caretakers**. 
* Since caretakers works with memento only via the limited interface, it's not able to tamper with the state stored inside the memento. At the same time, the originator has access to all the fields inside the memento, allowing it to restore its previous state at will.

`Note`(Use-case): When user triggers the undo, the history grabs the most recent memento from the stack and passes it back to the editor, requesting a roll-back.

### Structure
* The **Originator** class can produce snapshots of its own state, as well as restore its state from snapshots when needed.
* The **Memento** is a value object that acts as a snapshot of the originator's state. It's a common practive to make the memento immutable and pass it the data only once, via the constructor.
* The **Caretaker** knows not only *when* and *why* to capture the originator's state, but also when the state should be restored. Caretaker can keep track of the originator's history by storing a stack of mementos. When the originator has to travel back in history, the caretaker fetches the topmost memento from the stack and passes it to the originator's restoration method.


### Code

<details><summary>Memento Pattern</summary>

`Article.java`
```java
public class Article {
    private long id;
    private String title;
    private String content;

    public Article(long id, String title) {
        this.id = id;
        this.title = title;
    }

    public ArticleMemento createMemnto() {
        ArticleMemento memento = new ArticleMemento(id, title, content);
        return memento;
    }

    public void restore(ArticleMemento memento) {
        this.id = memento.getId();
        this.title = memento.getContent();
        this.content = memento.getContent();
    }

    @Override
    public String toString() {
        return "Article [id=" + id + ", title=" + title + ", content=" + content + ";";
    }

    public void setContent(String content) {
        this.content = content;
    }
}
```

`ArticleMemento.java`
```java
public final class ArticleMemento {
    private final long id;
    private final String title;
    private final String content;

    public ArticleMemento(long id, String title, String content) {
        this.id = id;
        this.title = title;
        this.content = content;
    }

    public long getId() {
        return id;
    }
    public String getTitle() {
        return title;
    }
    
    public String getContent() {
        return content;
    }
}
```

`ClientCode.java`   
```java
Article article = new Article(1, "My Article");
article.setContent("ABC");
System.out.println(article);

ArticleMemento memento = article.createMemnto();

article.setContent("123");
System.out.println(article);

article.restore(memento);
System.out.println(article);
```

`Output`
```
Article [id=1, title=My Article, content=ABC;
Article [id=1, title=My Article, content=123;
Article [id=1, title=ABC, content=ABC;
```

</details>

`Note`: Need to improve exampler code.

### Credits
- [Refactoring.Guru](https://refactoring.guru/)
- [HowToDoInJava](https://howtodoinjava.com/design-patterns/behavioral/memento-design-pattern/)

